Data Structures and Performance - Week 6 Notes on Hash Maps

-	Describe why hash tables are valuable and state the running time to find and insert elements into a hash table
	.	Arrays are very fast to retrieve an element from the array as it runs in O(1) - real time
	.	If you know where in memory the array starts, the index determines the address of any element
	.	In a hash table, we take the key (data to store) and through a hash function derive the index.
	Implications:
	=	positive: Average O(1) lookup, insert, remove
	=	negative: Resizing costs and no data ordering
	
-	Describe the role of a hash function
	+	hash functions are used in order to retrieve information from an array.
	+	K mod N is a common hash function (K is key, N is #elements in array.
	+	when using characters, transform first to integers (ASCII code)
	
-	Describe when collisions occur in hash tables
	+	If two elements are equal, than their hash values are the same.
	+	If two elements have the same hash value, they do not have to be equal (collisions)
	Key part of creating hash functions is trying to minimize collisions.
	Example: 9 mod 7 and 16 mod 7 both generate a hash code of 2.
	Solution 1:	Linear Probing
	.	look for the next open spot and insert it there. 
	.	when inserting a next value, it ends up underneath the other two.
		This could become problematic for Search, as we need to look for multiple positions,
		taking away the advantages of using an array when the table starts getting full.
	Solution 2: Random Probing
	.	Jump random # of steps instead of just the next step
	Alternative solution: Separate Chaining
	.	just keep a list at each spot (LinkedList)
	.	Also has some drawbacks
	Challenge 1: Table full! (Describe how to resize a hash table)
	If a hash table becomes too full(70% of capacity), the best thing to do is to resize it
	Requires to create a new table, a new hash function and reinsert everything!
	Challenge 2: Ordering data!
	.	In order to get data sorted they have to be pulled out and sorted separately!

-	Use hash tables through Java's built-in classes (HashSet and HashMap)
	Difference between Hash Set and Hash Map:
	Hash Set	-	contains index and data
				-	stores only elements you want to store
				-	It tells you if an item is in the set or not.
				-	Example: dictionary
				Methods: add(E e) and contains(Object o)
				
	Hash Map	-	contains index, data(key), data (value)
				-	stores both a key and some data associated with the key
				-	Example: movie database (name of movie, list of actors)
				Methods: get(Object key) and put(K key, V Value)
				
-	modular arithmetic explained
	K mod N is the remainder when we divide K by N -> integer between 0 and N-1
	Perfect for storing in an array of size N!

-	Describe a detailed algorithm for generating spelling suggestions for misspelled words
	We want to suggest words that are close to what was typed. What is close?
	Close == altered as little as possible (1 step away - single character transformation)
	Misspelled word is speel
	.	Substitution (choose a single character and replace it by a different character)
		apeel, sbeel, spell, speek, ...
	.	Insertion (choose a position in the String and insert a character in that position)
		bspeel, sipeel, spetel, speele, ...
	.	Deletion (choose a single character and remove it from the String)
		peel, seel, spel, spee
	1.	Generate all strings '1 away' from the original string
	2.	Discard those that are not words
	If this does not generate enough solutions, we can go 2 steps down for each string in the first subset
	
	Spelling algorithm:
	Add misspelled word to a queue
	While not enough words generated and queue not empty:
		remove the first string from the queue
		generate 1 away strings from the first string in the queue
		add these to the queue
		preserve those that are actual words in a separate list
		
	Optional Optimization: Keep track of strings you've seen and don't add them again
	
	
-	Define the notion of edit distance

-	Describe a naïve algorithm for calculating the edit distance between two strings

-	Write Java code to implement spelling suggestions and word paths